so all the time I see people asking how
big are the biggest stars and how big
can stars get and that is a really
interesting question and it's exciting
question because think about the big
things but actually I think a more
interesting question is actually how
small of the smallest stars because when
you start to get down to the very low
mass stars you hit this really
interesting gray area between what is a
planet and what is a star
essentially a star is any astronomical
object that got hot enough to ignite
nuclear fusion so anything that's hot
enough to burn hydrogen and turn it into
helium now that only happens when you
hit a very specific density so the way
that stars form is from huge big clouds
of hydrogen gas and what happens is that
when those clouds start to clump
together there are areas that get denser
and denser so gravity tends to bring
that gas together and cause it to get
denser denser now as that happens the
densest parts start to heat up because
of the amount of pressure that's pushing
down on them from that gravity now that
radiation can then escape in in form of
heat and that's kind of pushing against
gravity all the time and so you can
reach some sort of equilibrium for a
star to form that gravity has to win
over time but eventually it will then
get hot enough in the center of that gas
cloud that's solely contracting under
gravity to ignite nuclear fusion that
hydrogen into helium process which
produces light and energy so then you've
got radiation pressure which we call it
the pressure of literally light
particles coming outwards with lots of
energy pushing against gravity so then
you hit an equilibrium where the star is
happily burning lots of hydrogen fuel
and it's normal contracting under
gravity and it will continue like that
throughout its lifetime until it runs
out of fuel now the interesting thing
what happens is when you have those big
clouds of hydrogen gas that are
collapsing to form stars you don't just
get one huge cloud doing that what
happens is as the cloud contract you get
denser areas and those tend to bassy
clump off and so you can clump off and
off and off in a chain until you get
down to such small masses that actually
is those tiny lumps of clouds of gas
starts you contract under gravity you're
never going to hit a high enough
temperature to ignite nuclear fusion to
stop that gravitational collapse inwards
now that limit of that mass is about 8%
of the size of the Sun to be called the
Sun it has a solar mass of 1 so it's
point 0 8 solar masses but it's not like
there's nothing to stop that
gravitational collapse at all and they
hit something that we call electron
degeneracy pressure which is when the
atoms are so closely packed together the
electrons are literally repelling each
other they don't want to be in the same
place as each other and so that's what
stops the gravitational collapse further
and you still end up with a stable
object now these objects we call brown
dwarfs literally a dwarf star and
they're still very hot in the center
where they're being held up by electron
degeneracy pressure so they tend to glow
in the infrared what we call a black
body very simple emission of radiation
but also there's some debate about
whether the interior is actually hot
enough for deuterium burning to happen
now deuterium is what we call heavy
hydrogen so hydrogen usually is just one
proton surrounded by one electron heavy
hydrogen deuterium is a proton and a
neutron in the nucleus surrounded by an
electron and you can fuse deuterium
together with a proton to form helium-3
which is two protons and a neutron and
then get energy out as well and I always
think of deuterium as like spider-man
two and you've got dr. octopus who's
like get trying to get nuclear fusion to
work on earth and he needs deuterium to
do it so these stars do have fuel
available for them to burn but they're
clearly not the same as what we would
call a main-sequence star like the Sun
which is happily burning hydrogen into
helium for light and heat and energy so
these brown dwarfs get up to about eight
percent of the mass of the Sun which
still sounds like quite a lot of mass
because the sun's like pretty heavy but
in fact this is only 83 times the mass
of Jupiter so it raises this interesting
question about these low mass stars and
how different they really are to planets
the other thing about how we define a
planet as well there are three criteria
that you need the first is that it's not
hot enough for nuclear fusion which is
why we don't technically class these
brown dwarfs as planets the second is
that they need to be rounded under their
own gravity so so massive the the
gravity is evened out along the surface
to give you something spherical where
the gravity is equal along the whole
surface that's why asteroids comets etc
are not classed as planets because they
tend to be like lumpy bumpy
bobbly kind of objects and the third
thing is that the planet needs to have
cleared its orbit around its star so
this is why Pluto is in classes of
planet anymore because that it hasn't
cleared out its orbit you know it's only
something like seven percent of the mass
in its surrounding area compared to
something like Earth which is like
99.9999 am 19 percent of all the mass in
its area so that's all very well and
good for our own solar system one star
or the planets going around it but what
about when you think about other star
systems out there especially that the
majority of stars in our own Milky Way
are binary systems so our closest star
system towards the Alpha Centauri system
is actually three separate stars Alpha
Centauri Alpha Centauri B and Proxima
Centauri so if you have a binary system
of stars and one of those stars happens
to be like a brown dwarf or lower mass
than that then what do you have there do
you have two stars in a binary system or
do you have a star and a planet because
some of the most massive exoplanets that
are actually confirmed that we found are
up to 33 point 7 Jupiter masses that's
HD 1 for 8 to 8 for B there's a 26 point
7 Jupiter masses as well HD 1 372 for B
so there's a lot of gray area here
there's no clear defined mass cutoff
where you can say anything about this is
a star and anything below this is a
planet because what you also have as
well as brown dwarfs is something we
called sub-brown dwarfs and sub-brown
dwarfs where we think that it's not even
hot enough for deuterium burning anymore
and we think that cutoff is around about
13 times the mass of Jupiter so these
are things that are less than 13 times
the mass of Jupiter they formed in the
way that stars tend to form they're not
in orbit around a star at all it could
be isolated systems and yet they're not
planets and they're not stars
I either we don't call them isolated
planetary mass objects or I PMO's or
people also tend to call them Planum
Azure which i think is really cute so it
seems to be that the formation scenario
here is what's differentiating between
something that's a star a
one it and a Planum oh and there's a lot
of overlap in the mass of those things
and yet we can still identify which is
which based on where we find them and
the formation scenario as well so these
planner Mo's people tend to refer to
them as rogue planets because they don't
belong to a star system but another gray
area is the fact that you could also
refer to a rogue planet as something
that's been ejected from a star system
so for example the way we think the moon
formed around the earth is that another
planet in the very early solar system
crashed into Earth turning everything
molten and throwing around a load of
rock around the earth which eventually
coalesce to form the moon now imagine
instead that planet that we collided
with was so much bigger than Earth
instead of you know around about the
same size we could have been ejected
from the solar system by that collision
we would no longer have a star and the
earth would be a rogue planet wandering
around the galaxy orbiting around the
center of the galaxy rather than around
a star so these are also rogue planets
these ejected planets but now they've
not formed like a star would like a
fragmenting gas now they've actually
formed around a star in a system and
then been thrown out so people have
tried to estimate how many of these
Planum OHS and rogue planets there
should be which is not an easy
calculation because we can't see these
things the way we see planets in our own
solar system is because they reflect
light from the Sun same as in others
exoplanet star systems we sometimes see
the light reflected from stars and we
can see them that way but these are
rogue objects some of which we will be
able to see in the infrared but not a
lot because they're extremely faint
against the bright background of stars
in the Milky Way but from considerations
of simulations of planet formation and
how many of the objects formed get
thrown out in that two considerations if
you have a giant gas cloud and it's
fragmenting down into smaller and
smaller pieces how many of the small
things you should end up with at the end
people have estimated that it's in and
around the billions of planets in the
Milky Way not orbiting a star it's all
waiting around the center of the galaxy
itself and before any of you get the
idea someone is already thought to ask
is it enough mass to account for dark
matter-energy way and unfortunately it
doesn't come anywhere close enough to
that amount of mass so one of these
things that we have detected is called
OTS 44 and it has a mass of around about
11 and a half times the mass of Jupiter
so therefore that could be a planet or
it could be a sub ground or we're not
entirely sure but it means that there's
no nuclear fusion going on it was
detected in the infrared
it's about 560 light years away in the
constellation of chameleon and the cool
thing is and the reason that we think
we've been able to detect it is because
it had an excess of infrared light for
its size because it has this very dusty
disk around it the same kind of disks
that we see when there's planets forming
around a star so this is really cool
because it means that you could get
planets forming around a row planet and
obviously that rogue planet is not
burning any nuclear fusion so there
would be no energy output in order to
say support life one of the planets
around it but again we're blurring the
lines even more between planets and
stars and rogue planets now the smallest
Planum o that we have ever found is
three times the mass of Jupiter it's
called s Ori 17 it definitely needs a
better name in my opinion and it was
found back in 2002 by Zapatero Osorio
and it's very very close to this
theoretical limit that we've come up
with to say this is the smallest thing
you can form if you have a cloud of gas
fragmenting down to ever smaller and
smaller pieces and collapsing to form
these objects now that all comes from a
consideration of the balance between
gravity pulling inwards and then the
heat in the interior of the object
radiating energy outwards to give you
that balance so there's a point at which
the gas actually becomes opaque as it
hits a certain density and what I mean
by opaque is that literally the gas is
opaque to the radiation that's trying to
escape from the center to keep that
equilibrium between radiation outwards
and gravity inwards and so that's the
limit at which point you no longer will
break off into smaller chunks of gas but
at that point there's nothing
counteracting gravity anymore so you're
just going to collapse
whatever mash you have left down until
you hit electron degeneracy pressure and
that's the smallest thing you can end up
with now from our understanding of how
that happens and the balance between
those forces we've estimated that that's
between one and ten times the mass of
Jupiter which might not sound very
precise but in our army terms that is
really precise it's within an order of
magnitude it's within ten times so the
fact that we've been able to find
something that's three times the mass of
Jupiter is gonna let us put a much more
stringent limit on these objects that
form just like stars but are actually
planets these girls fall like Planum o
Planum o and the fact that spiderman a
very intelligent person thought that he
could drown nuclear fusion in the Hudson
River I was like hmm really spider-man
you want to think this through
we're planets Planum o's it's like Star
Wars rogue one should actually have been
called star wars planner Mo's planner
modes I want to show you guys my really
cool earrings this month as well look at
these guys I mean you know I love my
space inside jewelry on this channel but
these absolutely take numbers get their
high
you